---
title: Cartoon Network's Game Creators
author: Zee
date: '2024-09-09'
---
One of the firmest beliefs I have and maintain in regards to art is that unless you’ve actually tried making something, you don’t fully understand the mechanics of it. Even if you actively play video games, try to dissect it and engage with the mechanics of it, until you actually sit down and make one yourself, you won’t be able to fully break down the hows and whys of its operation.

One of the key ways in which we engage with a game is level design. It’s where we’re able to utilise the mechanics of the game and see what it’s truly made of. Even if a game has excellent gameplay, it all rings hollow if not for the level design. That’s why it makes complete sense that one of the most widespread tools given to players to modify a game is a level editor. One of the first cases of it was Lode Runner for the Apple II and NES, but it didn’t end there. The Doom Editing Utility was made by a fan of DOOM, Brendon Wyber, to create levels for the game. Nowadays, we’ve got Super Mario Maker and Super Mario Maker 2, but even past that, people make custom levels all the time for Super Mario Odyssey. 

In fact, level editors are how I got introduced to game design, they’re why I was inspired to create video games, and why today I write about games constructively. 

Back in the early 2010s when the Cartoon Network website was still a thing, under the games section was the new hot thing - Game Creators, specifically for Ben 10, Batman: The Brave and the Bold and Star Wars: The Clone Wars. All of these games operated the same way, they were essentially platformers with multiple characters who had one unique ability, but what set them apart is that you could make your own levels, share them with the world, and play other people’s created levels too. 

To me, it was a goldmine. As a kid, I loved puzzles (and I still do!). I love putting them together and breaking them apart and putting them together again. Platformers too, are puzzles in their own way - they’re like mazes, you need to figure out a route and how you’re going to go about that route. Similarly, creating a level is also a puzzle. “How do you create an interesting path?” “What obstacles do you place so that there’s a challenge but it’s still fun yet not impossible?” So many questions just like this pop up when you create a level - stuff that you wouldn’t think of as a player, but you certainly have to as a designer. 

Them being based off of intellectual property (or at the time, cartoons) I was into certainly got me more interested. 7 year old me being able to make a level in a Ben 10 game, I mean come on! Was it extremely robust, certainly not - especially now as a 21 year old who went back and tried it again (thanks to Flashpoint!), but for kids, it was such a great way to burrow those game design worms deep into my brain. 

It’s why I’m glad something like Super Mario Maker exists, or even Roblox or UEFN for Fortnite. It enables creativity and an understanding of what goes on beneath the surface of games you love, even if rudimentary, while also teaching you some of the skills that go into creating games through easy to access systems. 

Play games and engage with them, but also look for ways to put your own spin on them. Even if it’s something as simple as coming up with unofficial rules or creating a new level, it’ll give you a deeper love for games that you already love.
